blog_post.md, before:

# Using Snowflake as a data source to train ML models with Amazon SageMaker

_Amit Arora_, _Divya Muralidharan_

Amazon SageMaker is a fully managed machine learning (ML) service. With SageMaker, data scientists and developers can quickly and easily build and train ML models, and then directly deploy them into a production-ready hosted environment. It provides an integrated Jupyter authoring notebook instance for easy access to your data sources for exploration and analysis, so you don’t have to manage servers. It also provides common ML algorithms that are optimized to run efficiently against extremely large data in a distributed environment.

Amazon SageMaker requires that the training data for a machine learning (ML) model be present either in [S3 or in EFS or in FSX for Lustre](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/model-access-training-data.html). In order to train a model using data stored outside of the three supported storage services, the data first needs to be ingested into one of these services (typically S3). This requires building a data pipeline (using tools such as [Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler](https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/data-wrangler/)) to move data into S3. However, this may create a data management challenge in terms of managing the lifecycle of this data, access controls and more. In such situations it may be desirable to have the data accessible to SageMaker _without_ the intermediate storage of data in S3.

This post shows a way to do this using the [Snowflake Data Cloud](https://www.snowflake.com/) as the data source and by downloading the data directly from Snowflake into a SageMaker Training Job instance(s).

## Solution overview

We use the [California Housing Dataset](https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/python_scripts/datasets_california_housing.html) as a training dataset for this post and train an ML model to predict the median house value for each district. We add this data to Snowflake as a new table. We create a custom training container which downloads data directly from the Snowflake table into the training instance **_rather than first downloading the data into an S3 bucket_**. Once the data is downloaded into the training instance, the custom training script performs data preparation tasks and then trains the machine learning model using the [XGBoost Estimator](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/frameworks/xgboost/using_xgboost.html). All code for this blog post is available in this [GitHub repo](https://github.com/aws-samples/amazon-sagemaker-w-snowflake-as-datasource).

The following figure represents the high-level architecture of the proposed solution to use Snowflake as a data source to train ML models with Amazon SageMaker.

![Architecture](img/snowflake-sagemaker-page-1.png)

## Walkthrough

The workflow for the above architecture is as follows. The detailed instructions for each step are provided later in this post.

1. Ingest the data in a table in your Snowflake account.

1. Store your Snowflake account credentials in AWS Secrets Manager.

1. Setup an IAM role with appropriate permissions to allow Amazon SageMaker to access Amazon ECR, AWS Secrets Manager and other services within your AWS account.

1. Create a custom container image for ML model training and push it to Amazon ECR.

1. Launch a SageMaker Training job for training the ML model. The training instance retrieves Snowflake credentials from AWS Secrets Manager and then uses these credentials to download the dataset from Snowflake directly. _This is the step that eliminates the need for data to be first downloaded into an S3 bucket_.

1. The trained ML model is stored in an S3 bucket.

### Prerequisites

To implement the solution provided in this post, you should have an [AWS account](https://signin.aws.amazon.com/signin?redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fportal.aws.amazon.com%2Fbilling%2Fsignup%2Fresume&client_id=signup), a [Snowflake account](https://signup.snowflake.com/?utm_cta=trial-en-www-homepage-top-right-nav-ss-evg&_ga=2.36125795.2140702267.1672969035-1338836953.1670007010) and familiarity with Amazon SageMaker.

### Deployment steps

The following section provide a detailed description of the steps listed in the walkthrough section.

#### Set up IAM role and SageMaker Notebook

Click 'Launch Stack' for the AWS region you want to deploy resources into. This cloud formation template will create an IAM role called `SageMakerSnowFlakeExample` and a SageMaker Notebook called `aws-aiml-blogpost-sagemaker-snowflake-example` in your AWS account.

   |AWS Region                |     Link        |
   |:------------------------:|:-----------:|
   |us-east-1 (N. Virginia)    | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-east-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |us-east-2 (Ohio)          | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-east-2#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |us-west-1 (N. California) | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-west-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |us-west-2 (Oregon) | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-west-2#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml  target="_blank") |
   |eu-west-1 (Dublin)        | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=eu-west-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |ap-northeast-1 (Tokyo)    | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=ap-northeast-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |

#### Store Snowflake credentials in AWS Secrets Manager

Store your Snowflake credentials as a secret in AWS Secrets Manager. For instructions on how to create a secret in AWS Secrets Manager refer to [`Create an AWS Secrets Mananger secret`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/secretsmanager/latest/userguide/create_secret.html).

1. Name the secret as `snowflake_credentials`, this is required as the code in the `snowflake-load-dataset.ipynb` expects the secret to be called that.

1. Create the secret as a key-value pair with two keys:

    - `username`: this is your Snowflake username
    - `password`: this is the password associated with your Snowflake username.

#### Ingest the data in a table in your Snowflake account

1. In your AWS console navigate to Amazon SageMaker -> Notebooks instances and then click on `Open JupyterLab` for `aws-aiml-blogpost-sagemaker-snowflake-example`.

   ![Open JupyterLab](img/sm-nb-jl.png)

1. Double click on `snowflake-load-dataset.ipynb` to open it in JupyterLab. This will ingest the [California Housing Dataset](https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/python_scripts/datasets_california_housing.html) to a Snowflake table.

1. In the notebook, edit the contents of the following cell to replace the placeholder values with the one matching your snowflake account.

    ```{python}
    sf_account_id = "your-snowflake-account-id"
    ```

1. Now click on `Run All Cells` to run the code in this notebook, this will download the dataset locally into the notebook and then ingest it into the Snowflake table.

    ![Notebook Run All Cells](img/sm-nb-runall.png)

   The following code snippet in the notebook ingests the dataset into Snowflake. See the `snowflake-load-dataset.ipynb` notebook for the full code.

   ```{python}
   # connect to Snowflake Table schema
   conn.cursor().execute(f"CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS {schema}")
   conn.cursor().execute(f"USE SCHEMA {schema}")

   create_table_sql = f"CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS {db}.{schema}.{table}\n ("

   california_housing.rename(columns=str.upper, inplace=True)
   # iterating through the columns
   for col in california_housing.columns:
       column_name = col.upper()

   if (california_housing[col].dtype.name == "int" or california_housing[col].dtype.name == "int64"):
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " int"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "object":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " varchar(16777216)"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "datetime64[ns]":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " datetime"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "float64":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " float8"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "bool":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " boolean"
   else:
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " varchar(16777216)"

   # Deciding next steps. Either column is not the last column (add comma) else end create_tbl_statement
   if california_housing[col].name != california_housing.columns[-1]:
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + ",\n"
   else:
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + ")"

   # execute the SQL statement to create the table
   print(f"create_table_sql={create_table_sql}")
   conn.cursor().execute(create_table_sql)  
   print(f"snowflake_table={snowflake_table}")
   conn.cursor().execute('TRUNCATE TABLE IF EXISTS ' + snowflake_table)
   ```

1. Close the notebook once all cells run without any error. Your data is now available in Snowflake. The following screenshot shows the `california_housing` table created in Snowflake.

   ![Snowflake Table](img/snowflake-table.png)

#### Create a custom container for training

We will now create a custom container for the machine learning model training job. This container is based on the SageMaker XGBoost container image - `246618743249.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/sagemaker-xgboost:1.5-1` and has the following additions:

- The [Snowflake Connector for Python](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/python-connector.html) to download the data from the Snowflake table into the training instance.

- A Python script to connect to the AWS Secrets Manager to retrieve the Snowflake credentials.

Including the Snowflake connector and the Python script for AWS Secrets Manager ensures that users who use this container image for machine learning model training do not have to write this code as part of their training script and can use this functionality that is now already available to them.

Here is the `Dockerfile` for the training container.

   ```{python}
   # Build an image that can be used for training in Amazon SageMaker, we use
   # the SageMaker XGBoost as the base image as it contains support for distributed
   # training.
   FROM 246618743249.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/sagemaker-xgboost:1.5-1

   MAINTAINER Amazon AI <sage-learner@amazon.com>


   RUN apt-get -y update && apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends \
            wget \
            python3-pip \
            python3-setuptools \
            nginx \
            ca-certificates \
      && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

   RUN ln -s /usr/bin/python3 /usr/bin/python
   RUN ln -s /usr/bin/pip3 /usr/bin/pip

   # Here we get snowflake-connector python package.
   # pip leaves the install caches populated which uses a 
   # significant amount of space. These optimizations save a fair 
   # amount of space in the image, which reduces start up time.
   RUN pip --no-cache-dir install snowflake-connector-python==2.8.3  

   # Include python script for retrieving Snowflake credentials 
   # from AWS SecretsManager
   ADD snowflake_credentials.py /

   ```

The container image is built and pushed to Amazon ECR. This image is used for training the machine learning model.

#### Train the machine learning model using Amazon SageMaker Training Job

Once we successfully create the container image and publish it to Amazon ECR we can now start using for model training. 

1. We create a set of Python scripts to download the data from Snowflake using the [Snowflake Connector for Python](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/python-connector.html), prepare the data and then use the `XGBoost Regressor` to train the machine learning model. _It is the step of downloading the data directly into the training instance that avoids having to use Amazon S3 as the intermediate storage for training data_.

    - We facilitate _Distributed Data Parallel_ training by having the training code download a random subset of the data such that each training instance downloads an equal amount of data from Snowflake. For example, if there are two training nodes then each node downloads a random sample of 50% of the rows in the Snowflake table.

      ```{python}
      """
      Read the HOUSING table (this is the california housing dataset  used by this example)
      """
      import pandas as pd
      import snowflake.connector

      def data_pull(ctx: snowflake.connector.SnowflakeConnection, hosts: int) -> pd.DataFrame:
         
         # each node will download an equal percentage of the data
         record_percent = int(100/hosts)
         
         # Query Snowflake HOUSING table
         sql = f"select * from HOUSING sample {record_percent};"
         
         # Get the dataset into Pandas
         df = pd.read_sql(sql, ctx)
         
         # Prepare the data for ML
         df.dropna(inplace=True)
         
         downloaded_row_cnt = str(len(df))
         
         print(f"Number of random rows downloaded from snowflake:{downloaded_row_cnt}")
         
         df['AVG_ROOMS'] = (df['TOTAL_ROOMS']/df['HOUSEHOLDS']).round(6)
         df['AVG_BEDROOMS'] = (df['TOTAL_BEDROOMS']/df['HOUSEHOLDS']).round(6)
         df['AVE_OCCUP'] = (df['POPULATION']/df['HOUSEHOLDS']).round(6)
         df.drop(['OCEAN_PROXIMITY'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         df.drop(['TOTAL_ROOMS'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         df.drop(['TOTAL_BEDROOMS'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         df.drop(['HOUSEHOLDS'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         
         return df
      ```

1. We then provide the the training script to the SageMaker SDK [`Estimator`](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/training/estimators.html) along with the source directory so that all the scripts we create can be provided to the training container when the training job is run using the [`Estimator.fit`](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/training/estimators.html#sagemaker.estimator.EstimatorBase.fit) method. You can find detailed guidance in the documentation on [Preparing a Scikit-Learn training script](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/frameworks/sklearn/using_sklearn.html#prepare-a-scikit-learn-training-script) (for training).

    ```{python}
    custom_img_uri = f"{account_id}.dkr.ecr.{region}.amazonaws.com/{custom_img_name}:{custom_img_tag}"

    # Create Sagemaker Estimator
    xgb_script_mode_estimator = sagemaker.estimator.Estimator(
        image_uri = custom_img_uri,
        role=role,
        instance_count=instance_count,
        instance_type=instance_type,
        output_path="s3://{}/{}/output".format(bucket, prefix),
        sagemaker_session=session,
        entry_point="train.py",
        source_dir="./src",
        hyperparameters=hyperparams,
        environment=env,
        subnets = subnet_ids,
    )

    # start the training job
    xgb_script_mode_estimator.fit()
    ```

1. Once the model training is completed the trained model is available as `model.tar.gz` file in the default SageMaker S3 bucket for the region.

    ```{python}
    print(f"the trained model is available in S3 -> {xgb_script_mode_estimator.model_data}")
    ```

1. The trained model can then be deployed for getting inference on new data!

## Cleaning up

To avoid incurring future charges, delete the resources. You can do this by deleting the cloud formation template used to create the IAM role and the Amazon SageMaker Notebook.
![Cleaning Up](img/cfn-delete.png)

You will have to delete the Snowflake resources manually from the Snowflake console.

## Conclusion

In this solution, we saw how to download data stored in Snowflake table to Amazon SageMaker Training job instance and train a XGBoost model using a custom training container. **This approach allows us to directly integrate Snowflake as a data source with Amazon SageMaker notebook without having the data staged on S3.**

## Author bio

<img style="float: left;" src="img/Amit.png">&nbsp;Amit Arora is an AI and ML specialist architect at Amazon Web &nbsp;Services, helping enterprise customers use cloud-based machine &nbsp;learning services to rapidly scale their innovations. He is also an &nbsp;adjunct lecturer in M.S. data analytics program at &nbsp;Georgetown University in Washington D.C.<br><br><br><br>

<img style="float: left;" src="img/Divya.jfif">&nbsp;Divya Muralidharan is a Solutions Architect at Amazon Web Services.

Commit message:

Updated blog_post.md with jupyter notebook ref

blog_post.md, after:

# Using Snowflake as a data source to train ML models with Amazon SageMaker

_Amit Arora_, _Divya Muralidharan_

Amazon SageMaker is a fully managed machine learning (ML) service. With SageMaker, data scientists and developers can quickly and easily build and train ML models, and then directly deploy them into a production-ready hosted environment. It provides an integrated Jupyter authoring notebook instance for easy access to your data sources for exploration and analysis, so you don’t have to manage servers. It also provides common ML algorithms that are optimized to run efficiently against extremely large data in a distributed environment.

Amazon SageMaker requires that the training data for a machine learning (ML) model be present either in [S3 or in EFS or in FSX for Lustre](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/latest/dg/model-access-training-data.html). In order to train a model using data stored outside of the three supported storage services, the data first needs to be ingested into one of these services (typically S3). This requires building a data pipeline (using tools such as [Amazon SageMaker Data Wrangler](https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/data-wrangler/)) to move data into S3. However, this approach may create a data management challenge in terms of managing the lifecycle of this data storage medium, crafting access controls, data auditing etc, all for the purpose of staging training data for the duration of the training job. In such situations it may be desirable to have the data accessible to SageMaker in the ephermeral storage media attached to the ephemeral training instances _without_ the intermediate storage of data in S3.

This post shows a way to do this using the [Snowflake Data Cloud](https://www.snowflake.com/) as the data source and by downloading the data directly from Snowflake into a SageMaker Training Job instance(s).

## Solution overview

We use the [California Housing Dataset](https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/python_scripts/datasets_california_housing.html) as a training dataset for this post and train an ML model to predict the median house value for each district. We add this data to Snowflake as a new table. We create a custom training container which downloads data directly from the Snowflake table into the training instance **_rather than first downloading the data into an S3 bucket_**. Once the data is downloaded into the training instance, the custom training script performs data preparation tasks and then trains the machine learning model using the [XGBoost Estimator](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/frameworks/xgboost/using_xgboost.html). All code for this blog post is available in this [GitHub repo](https://github.com/aws-samples/amazon-sagemaker-w-snowflake-as-datasource).

The following figure represents the high-level architecture of the proposed solution to use Snowflake as a data source to train ML models with Amazon SageMaker.

![Architecture](img/snowflake-sagemaker-page-1.png)

## Walkthrough

The workflow for the above architecture is as follows. The detailed instructions for each step are provided later in this post.

1. Ingest the data in a table in your Snowflake account.

1. Store your Snowflake account credentials in AWS Secrets Manager.

1. Setup an IAM role with appropriate permissions to allow Amazon SageMaker to access Amazon ECR, AWS Secrets Manager and other services within your AWS account.

1. Create a custom container image for ML model training and push it to Amazon ECR.

1. Launch a SageMaker Training job for training the ML model. The training instance retrieves Snowflake credentials from AWS Secrets Manager and then uses these credentials to download the dataset from Snowflake directly. _This is the step that eliminates the need for data to be first downloaded into an S3 bucket_.

1. The trained ML model is stored in an S3 bucket.

### Prerequisites

To implement the solution provided in this post, you should have an [AWS account](https://signin.aws.amazon.com/signin?redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fportal.aws.amazon.com%2Fbilling%2Fsignup%2Fresume&client_id=signup), a [Snowflake account](https://signup.snowflake.com/?utm_cta=trial-en-www-homepage-top-right-nav-ss-evg&_ga=2.36125795.2140702267.1672969035-1338836953.1670007010) and familiarity with Amazon SageMaker.

### Deployment steps

The following section provide a detailed description of the steps listed in the walkthrough section.

#### Set up IAM role and SageMaker Notebook

Click 'Launch Stack' for the AWS region you want to deploy resources into. This cloud formation template will create an IAM role called `SageMakerSnowFlakeExample` and a SageMaker Notebook called `aws-aiml-blogpost-sagemaker-snowflake-example` in your AWS account.

   |AWS Region                |     Link        |
   |:------------------------:|:-----------:|
   |us-east-1 (N. Virginia)    | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-east-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |us-east-2 (Ohio)          | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-east-2#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |us-west-1 (N. California) | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-west-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |us-west-2 (Oregon) | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=us-west-2#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |eu-west-1 (Dublin)        | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=eu-west-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |
   |ap-northeast-1 (Tokyo)    | [<img src="./img/cloudformation-launch-stack.png">](https://console.aws.amazon.com/cloudformation/home?region=ap-northeast-1#/stacks/new?stackName=sagemake-snowflake-example-stack&templateURL=https://aws-blogs-artifacts-public.s3.amazonaws.com/artifacts/ML-12893/sagemaker-snowflake-template.yml) |

#### Store Snowflake credentials in AWS Secrets Manager

Store your Snowflake credentials as a secret in AWS Secrets Manager. For instructions on how to create a secret in AWS Secrets Manager refer to [`Create an AWS Secrets Mananger secret`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/secretsmanager/latest/userguide/create_secret.html).

1. Name the secret as `snowflake_credentials`, this is required as the code in the `snowflake-load-dataset.ipynb` expects the secret to be called that.

1. Create the secret as a key-value pair with two keys:

    - `username`: this is your Snowflake username
    - `password`: this is the password associated with your Snowflake username.

#### Ingest the data in a table in your Snowflake account

1. In your AWS console navigate to Amazon SageMaker -> Notebooks instances and then click on `Open JupyterLab` for `aws-aiml-blogpost-sagemaker-snowflake-example`.

   ![Open JupyterLab](img/sm-nb-jl.png)

1. Double click on `snowflake-load-dataset.ipynb` to open it in JupyterLab. This will ingest the [California Housing Dataset](https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/python_scripts/datasets_california_housing.html) to a Snowflake table.

1. In the notebook, edit the contents of the following cell to replace the placeholder values with the one matching your snowflake account.

    ```{python}
    sf_account_id = "your-snowflake-account-id"
    ```

1. Now click on `Run All Cells` to run the code in this notebook, this will download the dataset locally into the notebook and then ingest it into the Snowflake table.

    ![Notebook Run All Cells](img/sm-nb-runall.png)

   The following code snippet in the notebook ingests the dataset into Snowflake. See the `snowflake-load-dataset.ipynb` notebook for the full code.

   ```{python}
   # connect to Snowflake Table schema
   conn.cursor().execute(f"CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS {schema}")
   conn.cursor().execute(f"USE SCHEMA {schema}")

   create_table_sql = f"CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS {db}.{schema}.{table}\n ("

   california_housing.rename(columns=str.upper, inplace=True)
   # iterating through the columns
   for col in california_housing.columns:
       column_name = col.upper()

   if (california_housing[col].dtype.name == "int" or california_housing[col].dtype.name == "int64"):
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " int"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "object":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " varchar(16777216)"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "datetime64[ns]":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " datetime"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "float64":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " float8"
   elif california_housing[col].dtype.name == "bool":
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " boolean"
   else:
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + column_name + " varchar(16777216)"

   # Deciding next steps. Either column is not the last column (add comma) else end create_tbl_statement
   if california_housing[col].name != california_housing.columns[-1]:
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + ",\n"
   else:
       create_table_sql = create_table_sql + ")"

   # execute the SQL statement to create the table
   print(f"create_table_sql={create_table_sql}")
   conn.cursor().execute(create_table_sql)  
   print(f"snowflake_table={snowflake_table}")
   conn.cursor().execute('TRUNCATE TABLE IF EXISTS ' + snowflake_table)
   ```

1. Close the notebook once all cells run without any error. Your data is now available in Snowflake. The following screenshot shows the `california_housing` table created in Snowflake.

   ![Snowflake Table](img/snowflake-table.png)

#### Open sagemaker-snowflake-example.ipynb notebook
   ![Open JupyterLab](img/sm_snowflake_example.png)
This notebook will create a custom training container with SnowFlake connection, extract data from SnowFlake into the training instance without staging it in S3, and perform Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) XGBoost model training on the data. DDP Training is not required for model training on such a small dataset; it is included here for illustration of yet another recently released SageMaker feature.

#### Creating a custom container for training as part of a Jupyter Notebook 

We will now create a custom container for the machine learning model training job. This container is based on the SageMaker XGBoost container image - `246618743249.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/sagemaker-xgboost:1.5-1` and has the following additions:

- The [Snowflake Connector for Python](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/python-connector.html) to download the data from the Snowflake table into the training instance.

- A Python script to connect to the AWS Secrets Manager to retrieve the Snowflake credentials.

Including the Snowflake connector and the Python script for AWS Secrets Manager ensures that users who use this container image for machine learning model training do not have to write this code as part of their training script and can use this functionality that is now already available to them.

Here is the `Dockerfile` for the training container.

   ```{python}
   # Build an image that can be used for training in Amazon SageMaker, we use
   # the SageMaker XGBoost as the base image as it contains support for distributed
   # training.
   FROM 246618743249.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/sagemaker-xgboost:1.5-1

   MAINTAINER Amazon AI <sage-learner@amazon.com>


   RUN apt-get -y update && apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends \
            wget \
            python3-pip \
            python3-setuptools \
            nginx \
            ca-certificates \
      && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

   RUN ln -s /usr/bin/python3 /usr/bin/python
   RUN ln -s /usr/bin/pip3 /usr/bin/pip

   # Here we get snowflake-connector python package.
   # pip leaves the install caches populated which uses a 
   # significant amount of space. These optimizations save a fair 
   # amount of space in the image, which reduces start up time.
   RUN pip --no-cache-dir install snowflake-connector-python==2.8.3  

   # Include python script for retrieving Snowflake credentials 
   # from AWS SecretsManager
   ADD snowflake_credentials.py /

   ```

The container image is built and pushed to Amazon ECR. This image is used for training the machine learning model.

#### Train the machine learning model using Amazon SageMaker Training Job

Once we successfully create the container image and publish it to Amazon ECR we can now start using for model training. 

1. We create a set of Python scripts to download the data from Snowflake using the [Snowflake Connector for Python](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/python-connector.html), prepare the data and then use the `XGBoost Regressor` to train the machine learning model. _It is the step of downloading the data directly into the training instance that avoids having to use Amazon S3 as the intermediate storage for training data_.

    - We facilitate _Distributed Data Parallel_ training by having the training code download a random subset of the data such that each training instance downloads an equal amount of data from Snowflake. For example, if there are two training nodes then each node downloads a random sample of 50% of the rows in the Snowflake table.

      ```{python}
      """
      Read the HOUSING table (this is the california housing dataset  used by this example)
      """
      import pandas as pd
      import snowflake.connector

      def data_pull(ctx: snowflake.connector.SnowflakeConnection, hosts: int) -> pd.DataFrame:
         
         # each node will download an equal percentage of the data
         record_percent = int(100/hosts)
         
         # Query Snowflake HOUSING table
         sql = f"select * from HOUSING sample {record_percent};"
         
         # Get the dataset into Pandas
         df = pd.read_sql(sql, ctx)
         
         # Prepare the data for ML
         df.dropna(inplace=True)
         
         downloaded_row_cnt = str(len(df))
         
         print(f"Number of random rows downloaded from snowflake:{downloaded_row_cnt}")
         
         df['AVG_ROOMS'] = (df['TOTAL_ROOMS']/df['HOUSEHOLDS']).round(6)
         df['AVG_BEDROOMS'] = (df['TOTAL_BEDROOMS']/df['HOUSEHOLDS']).round(6)
         df['AVE_OCCUP'] = (df['POPULATION']/df['HOUSEHOLDS']).round(6)
         df.drop(['OCEAN_PROXIMITY'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         df.drop(['TOTAL_ROOMS'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         df.drop(['TOTAL_BEDROOMS'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         df.drop(['HOUSEHOLDS'], axis = 1, inplace=True)
         
         return df
      ```

1. We then provide the the training script to the SageMaker SDK [`Estimator`](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/training/estimators.html) along with the source directory so that all the scripts we create can be provided to the training container when the training job is run using the [`Estimator.fit`](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/training/estimators.html#sagemaker.estimator.EstimatorBase.fit) method. You can find detailed guidance in the documentation on [Preparing a Scikit-Learn training script](https://sagemaker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/frameworks/sklearn/using_sklearn.html#prepare-a-scikit-learn-training-script) (for training).

    ```{python}
    custom_img_uri = f"{account_id}.dkr.ecr.{region}.amazonaws.com/{custom_img_name}:{custom_img_tag}"

    # Create Sagemaker Estimator
    xgb_script_mode_estimator = sagemaker.estimator.Estimator(
        image_uri = custom_img_uri,
        role=role,
        instance_count=instance_count,
        instance_type=instance_type,
        output_path="s3://{}/{}/output".format(bucket, prefix),
        sagemaker_session=session,
        entry_point="train.py",
        source_dir="./src",
        hyperparameters=hyperparams,
        environment=env,
        subnets = subnet_ids,
    )

    # start the training job
    xgb_script_mode_estimator.fit()
    ```

1. Once the model training is completed the trained model is available as `model.tar.gz` file in the default SageMaker S3 bucket for the region.

    ```{python}
    print(f"the trained model is available in S3 -> {xgb_script_mode_estimator.model_data}")
    ```

1. The trained model can then be deployed for getting inference on new data!

## Cleaning up

To avoid incurring future charges, delete the resources. You can do this by deleting the cloud formation template used to create the IAM role and the Amazon SageMaker Notebook.
![Cleaning Up](img/cfn-delete.png)

You will have to delete the Snowflake resources manually from the Snowflake console.

## Conclusion

In this solution, we saw how to download data stored in Snowflake table to Amazon SageMaker Training job instance and train a XGBoost model using a custom training container. **This approach allows us to directly integrate Snowflake as a data source with Amazon SageMaker notebook without having the data staged on S3.**

## Author bio

<img style="float: left;" src="img/Amit.png">&nbsp;Amit Arora is an AI and ML specialist architect at Amazon Web &nbsp;Services, helping enterprise customers use cloud-based machine &nbsp;learning services to rapidly scale their innovations. He is also an &nbsp;adjunct lecturer in M.S. data analytics program at &nbsp;Georgetown University in Washington D.C.<br><br><br><br>

<img style="float: left;" src="img/Divya.jfif">&nbsp;Divya Muralidharan is a Solutions Architect at Amazon Web Services.
